[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: In my last
conversation with Neil Kramer,
we spoke about how
empires are formed
through our own
lack of direction.
Today we'll speak
about reestablishing
our own authority
in the world while
still under the influence of
empire, one step at a time.
It's so good to
have you back, Neil.
That was a great
last conversation.
I loved it.
And I think most people
watching this are already
primed from that one.
There will be a
couple things we'll
kind of touch on and expand on.
But first of all, we're
told to give our power away.
Let's just start
with that right there
before we go into
how to reclaim it.
We're told from every
established viewpoint,
from every agency, from
every family pattern,
to give our authority
away in life.
That's how we start in the
world, for the most part.
For 98% of us, maybe 99.9%.
>>NEIL KRAMER: Absolutely.
And particularly
in Britain, where
we have a
constitutional monarchy.
Since I was a child we were
taught that the queen is
the boss and the government
do the administration.
But this lady has
to sign it off.
And that's instilled into
lots of young people.
Of course that changes,
but it gives you
the wording of being a subject.
A subject of the
British empire, which
is still wording
that exists today.
And it didn't strike, you
know, the young Neil Kramer
until he was 18 or whatever
to think, subject to what?
Subject to what empire?
So it's ironic, the
wording, isn't it?
In light of the conversation
we're having, to say, would
I like to consider myself
as the subject of an empire?
And the answer is, not really.
I don't think so.
>>REGINA: No.
And one thing we didn't talk
about in our last conversation
that I had wanted to get to,
because you've just brought it
up, and you were talking
about England specifically,
is this notion of having
given up our sovereignty.
One of the best examples of
that is the CCTV cameras.
I mean, I've been shocked.
They're even on the trains.
There isn't-- my understanding,
there isn't a block of London
that doesn't have
these, essentially,
surveillance cameras, on it.
So if you're walking
down the street
and doing normal transaction,
seeing your family,
your friends,
whatever you're doing,
you're on camera if
you're not in your home.
And this has had-- I mean, to
me, that's just horrifying.
What kind of effect is
it having on the Brits?
Although they've been told
to surrender to the empire,
is it a little
different mentality?
>>KRAMER: I would say
anybody 40 and above will
find it horrifying and
say, what on earth is
happening to this country?
It's a disgrace.
And it is a disgrace.
For a lot of younger
people, they've
grown up with the cameras,
and that's part of the deal.
To say, they've been used
to cameras in school.
They've been used to cameras
on the freeways, motorways,
the streets, the street corner,
the hospital, the trains,
everywhere.
The taxi cabs, everywhere.
And so a lot of
young people now,
who are 10, 20, 30 years
old, have grown up with that.
So they've been acclimatized to
it, which I think is the game.
The interesting thing
about the cameras
is that initially
it was to say, OK,
we're going to keep
up tabs on people
so if some violent incident
occurs, some old lady's mugged,
we can catch the perpetrator.
And isn't that
happy for everybody?
You've got nothing to
be afraid of if you're
doing nothing wrong.
>>REGINA: Oh, that's
the catch, isn't it?
>>KRAMER: Right?
And to the uninitiated,
that sounds reasonable.
It sounds like common sense.
If you've not done
anything wrong,
you've got nothing
to be afraid of.
This lady, Theresa May,
says that all the time
in British politics.
The reality is,
when you understand,
for viewers who have to listened
to our previous conversations,
what empire is, which is
this ethos of manipulation
to limit human
beings' growth, you
can't afford to say that you're
doing nothing wrong anymore.
For me, I'm not
doing anything wrong.
But the actions
I participate in,
which require sovereign
spirit and sovereign movement
of my deeds and
thoughts in the world,
are antagonistic to empire.
So my very being opposes empire.
So I am doing something wrong
from their point of view.
So the cameras would
take a special look
at somebody like me, and there's
millions of people like me.
And the software behind
some of the cameras
now is actually looking
at behavioral movement
of the people to see how
you stand, how you sit,
how you move.
And it's not long, and I
expect in some laboratories
or whatever somewhere,
they're doing this now,
where your actual
thoughts that give off
this electromagnetic
pulse can be seen.
Whether you're using
the part of your brain
that some people call the
default mode network, which
is all the kind of routine
programming of empire,
or the task positive
network, which
is your momentary spiritual
awareness, you might say.
That's a little bit
of a crude summation.
But you get the idea.
You could measure--
you can physically
do this with the technology
now, which parts of the brain
are being activated.
At the moment, you have to put
the little things on the head.
But I bet you can do
it from a distance.
And if that was the case,
they could measure people,
and see them, who are
thinking differently.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And aside from just the invasion
of privacy, like you said,
it's-- and we're going to
talk about culture in a moment
and regaining sovereignty amidst
the popular culture at large,
but this, the fact that the
younger people are actually
acquiescent to it now is, to me,
one of the most dangerous signs
for what our future could hold.
Because now people have
been taught to truly
give away all
sovereignty, all privacy.
I mean, they have speakers
on a lot of these CCTV stands
with the cameras that
someone, whoever's
behind the curtain,
who's watching
that neighborhood
and all the cameras,
sees someone littering.
And I've seen this.
I've actually seen this.
The video was released.
You have a voice saying,
sir in the red jacket,
please pick up that item you
just put on the sidewalk.
Oh my god.
This is way worse than
any Big Brother scenario
we've ever dreamed of.
>>KRAMER: You know, a friend--
>>REGINA: What does
this do to our future?
>>KRAMER: A friend-- what
does it do to our future.
I'll answer that in a moment.
A friend sent me some dialogue
from George Orwell's novel,
"1984," and it's
not funny anymore,
because it's actually
transpired now.
It's already happened.
We're not talking
about, oh, we're close.
It's already happened.
We were talking
specifically, for example,
about in 1828, when Noah
Webster wrote this marvelous
American Dictionary,
he had the word
in there, "discriminate,"
which meant
to determine the quality of
the thing from good or bad,
from excellent or poor.
And it was a mark of
classification based on merit.
And now, the same Merriam
Webster Dictionary,
as it is now, the
very primary meaning
of the word "discrimination" is
to unfairly separate one group
or individual or
idea from another.
Unfairly.
That's a new thing.
There's nothing unfair
in discrimination.
Nothing.
That's a moral installation
in the program of thinking
that's put forward
to new people.
So the word "discrimination," in
the last 160 years or whatever,
has become a different word now.
And that's an
element of control.
I will say this, though,
about young people.
They're being asked to give
away their self authority.
And they're being asked
to do silly things,
and they're being asked to
participate in a society
where privacy is gone.
But not all of them are
acquiescing to that.
Not all of them.
And last week, I met these
two wonderful young women
from Seattle, 22
and 24 they were.
And they were really super
powerful, profound warrior
princesses.
And it was just
delightful to see
how they completely saw through
the little anemic smokescreen
of empire and thought, we love
coming to this event with you
Neil Kramer, because you make
us realize that, A, we're not
alone.
B, we're doing
something of honor
and of-- using our privilege
of freedom and power.
And we're doing
something that matters.
And from time to time, we have
to gather together to do that.
You don't have to have a
speaker or a writer or anything
with you, but just to come
together and examine the system
and let off steam and
to make jokes about it.
And to remember that
real human culture
is something that the
mainstream media doesn't really
have a talk about.
And that they were
very aware of that.
And they could have been my
bloody daughters, you know,
that's how young they were.
And it was very
encouraging to see that.
>>REGINA: Well, it is.
I've just been reading a book
called "The Phoenix Generation"
by Kingsley Dennis.
And he's saying that
that generation, which
will-- they'll
become solidly of age
in 2030, the group
he's talking about.
That they-- inner authority
will be their way of living.
But at the same time, they
will be not just accustomed to,
but actually rely
upon, transparency.
So again, I bring
these cameras up,
because here we have it as
an invasion from the way
we were raised.
As you say, anyone
over 40, this is
just horrific, what's happened.
But to the younger
people, they've
been acculturated to it.
So that's one thing.
They understand, that's
just how life is now.
But is there something
in that mix, subtly,
that has to do with
transparency, that
will be desirable in regaining
our authority and autonomy?
>>KRAMER: That's
a great question.
I know people say that,
but I really mean it.
It's a great question.
There is an element in
it where the contents
of our lives and
our hearts and minds
get spilled out on the
table for everybody to see.
And it's an interesting thing,
where you can consider it
as a precursor to a state
of, like, mass telepathy
amongst humankind,
which I've spoken
about at previous things.
You have to console and
consider the fact that,
are you prepared to have all
your cards face up like that?
>>REGINA: That's
exactly right, yeah.
>>KRAMER: And my question
is, when I go to the airport,
I always willfully get into that
scanner and go, eh, scan me.
I'm a sovereign being.
I've got nothing to worry about.
You want to check through
my pockets, that's fine.
Here, I'll take my shoes off.
Do you want to see my
hairy toes, as well?
I don't mind, right?
I don't mind that.
You want to surveil
me, here I am.
Surveil me.
I don't mind.
I've got nothing to worry about.
But not because I've
done anything wrong,
because I know who I am.
And I know that there's no
authority above me, you see.
That's the key difference.
If you don't get that, if
you don't acknowledge it--
I wouldn't quite use
the word believe,
but if you don't get it, if you
don't grock it, as they say,
then you subject yourself to
the power of surveillance.
And you're actually physically
giving your light away.
>>REGINA: And you're,
again, a subject.
>>KRAMER: You become a subject.
You subject yourself to another.
You become subject
to a process that you
don't have any control over.
That's always a choice.
And I think that's the key
thing in all our conversations
on "Open Minds."
That's always a choice.
And it doesn't occur
to people, that,
until they're already
embroiled in it
and hopelessly entangled in it.
And there's always a possibility
that you can make that nice.
You can smooth it out.
You can learn the
lesson and resolve it.
But more importantly,
for us now,
in our middle life,
in the middle part
of our process of maturation,
but also for the young people
to say, be conscious about the
things that you consent to.
And be conscious who's
asking you to do something.
Gauge the wisdom of the person
who asks for your consent.
If it's somebody in
their cell phone shop,
if it's a government
official, if it's a policeman,
if it's a fireman, if it's
a high school principal,
gauge the wisdom
of that individual.
And as we said in our
last conversation,
the state trooper that I was
with was quite a wise man,
not just because the let
me off my speeding ticket,
but because we had
a conversation.
And he said, you
know what, you are
going a little bit too fast.
And I said, I know.
I said, I am going too fast.
15 miles over.
It's 55, I was doing 70.
That's a clear ticket.
I said, you know what, I
am going to change that,
because there's deers that
run out here all the time,
and it could just be nasty.
And he said, honestly, he said,
please drive more carefully.
And I looked at him right
in the eye, and I said,
you know what, I actually will.
I will do that.
And I really looked at
him, and he believed me.
And then he went away and
said, drive more carefully.
Get out of here.
And that was it.
>>REGINA: And I told you I
had-- maybe the same day.
I mean, it was last week.
>>KRAMER: It was the
same guy, wasn't it.
>>REGINA: It wasn't.
Mine was Officer Good.
But it was a similar
conversation, where I thought,
it didn't used to be this
speed in this little area here.
And he said, sure enough,
that they had changed it.
And I said, well, so why?
And once he explained it
to me, I said, you know,
that's a very good point.
It was the same thing.
It was a respectful
conversation between us.
>>KRAMER: That's
discretionary, wise,
policing of things that
are common sense that we
momentarily, genuinely,
it slips our mind.
We were busy, we were
in a rush, whatever.
In England, going back to
the CCTV, on the motorways,
they call them in England,
you know, the freeways,
they have these things
called SPECS cameras.
These yellow cameras on
top of the poles, and they
measure your
average distance-- I
beg your pardon, your average
speed over a given distance,
and you just get a ticket.
There's no discretion in that.
There's no human beings
involved in that.
That's just a machine
issuing tickets.
And they've been trialing
this in Glasgow and Edinburgh,
where, not only for
motorists, but any offense.
They'll run your
plate as you drive
through a city, regardless of
any sort of probable cause.
That doesn't come into it.
They run the plate of your
car as you drive through,
and anything wrong at all,
with you, your car, your being,
your insurance, your medical,
anything wrong at all.
>>REGINA: If you're
late on a bill.
>>KRAMER: If you've
been late on a bill.
That's coming next.
If you ever had any
mental health problems,
they can see that data.
Believe me, they can see that.
Because our equivalent
of the emergency
terrorist provision
means that they
can access any information
in any database
and share it without
your knowledge.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Well, and we were speaking
off-camera about this.
And you were saying,
but still, we
have to remember
that in this country,
we're sitting in
the US right now,
there is actually still a fair
amount of freedom, relatively
speaking, to the
rest of the country.
We tend to think of it more as
invasion through credit card
companies or email
exchanges and so forth.
And in fact, a man
that everyone loved,
it was kind of like a funny
version of "V for Vendetta"
in one way.
There was a fellow
in Phoenix, Arizona
who-- they had just installed
those cameras on the freeway.
And this was where
everyone blasts to work.
Of course you're
going to go 70 or 75.
It's built for that.
And they had lowered
the speed limit.
So this fellow would
put on his gorilla suit
and then speed
through every day.
He had like one ticket after
another that was sent to him.
>>KRAMER: But they
couldn't identify him.
>>REGINA: They
couldn't identify him,
because you had to
identify the face.
So what they did,
they changed the law--
that you only had to have the
license plate number-- because
of this little
gorilla road warrior.
>>KRAMER: That's funny.
That's funny, that is.
>>REGINA: But that
someone did it,
and it forced their hand to
have to do something about it,
I thought was just a
beautiful act of resistance.
>>KRAMER: It is.
And one thing,
that-- I will sum up
some of the differences
between Europe and America
in this sentence.
That America is so new, there's
only 300 years of history,
effectively.
So new, that your pioneering
spirit of all these people
who went to different places,
some of them doing bad things,
some of them doing good things,
but that pioneering spirit
has not disappeared yet.
In England, I'm
sad to say, and I
love England like nowhere
else on the planet,
but that doesn't exist.
In the spiritual and conscious
communities, it's different.
People are awesome.
Really, seriously,
radically awesome.
And that's not going to change.
But in the mainstream,
there is now
a cynicism and a
resignation and a sense,
a smell in the air of defeat.
That's not helping
anything at all there.
Here it's different,
where people
don't want-- Americans don't
like to be told what to do.
Or let's say less than
the Europeans, right?
Europeans have been used
to being squashed down
for thousands of years.
Americans have not.
Where I live, in a lovely
coastal community, the Sheriff,
I know who he is.
And like, if you
see something bad,
you're in immediate
trouble, because he
knows who people are.
It's like old school
policing, right?
The church people,
I know who they are.
They know who I am.
I've spoken at their church.
The lady at the post
office, I know who she is,
and if something
goes wrong, she'll
use her discretion
to change things.
You know, if mail's
gone astray or whatever.
And there's just this old,
simple thing of community.
We know who each other are,
and there's accountability.
And there's responsibility.
And we know that we
keep each other sane
and safe and equitable through
that network of accountability.
>>REGINA: And that
is really key.
Because that's part of
regaining sovereignty.
>>KRAMER: It is.
And the power is spread
throughout the community.
It's not just with
people with bits
of paper in City
Hall or whatever.
It's with everyone.
And the police, if they
do something stupid,
they will be like castigated
and excommunicated.
So they have to
behave themselves,
which is how it ought to be.
So there's an equilibrium
when the numbers of people
are of a certain low,
sustainable level.
The last thing you want
is a booming community.
That's a disaster
for a community.
You want stable numbers.
Some new incomers,
some people go out.
Sure, that's life.
Some people migrate inwards
for economic reasons, sure.
That's life.
But the community has a definite
character and a definite spirit
and a set of qualities
and properties
that need to be celebrated
and engaged with and upheld,
you know?
And that is being
destroyed in Europe.
Where a community cannot
celebrate its character of any
description, religiously or
ethnically or historically
or in any sense.
Any cultural, basic human
sense, because it's now
against the law to do some
of those things because it
may incite racial hatred.
So diversity,
which nobody really
understands what that word
is in Britain anymore,
is become a terribly disengaging
and discriminatory act as far
as they're concerned.
>>REGINA: Yes, and you bring
up a really good point.
That was a powerful endorsement
for small town living,
by the way, and small
town living in America.
And I think even in
small town England,
it's still similar
in a lot of ways.
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
In some communities,
they've got it right.
>>REGINA: People still
know each other's business
and look out for each other.
But I think it's
important to note, also,
that you don't have to
be living in a small town
in order to begin bringing
the spirit of small community.
You can bring it to your block,
your neighborhood, your street.
>>KRAMER: You can.
Use people's names.
Speak to people and
learn their names.
So when I go into
the post office
and say, good morning,
Tina, how are you?
She says, it's lovely to
see you Neil, how are you?
Well, it's a bit
cloudy today, but I
think it's going to--
those little things.
Know what somebody's name is.
Do you know the names of
the people on your street?
Do they know your name?
And it's not OK to just drive
past someone, and just do that.
Make yourself acquainted
with the people
that you live with, because
in times of earth changes,
and when I was involved
in this massive,
as we call it, snowpocalypse
a few years ago,
no power for 10 days.
No running water, no power, no
heat, no electricity, nothing.
Icy conditions, zero,
subzero temperatures.
The thing that made
that OK was community.
After a couple of days, when
things are clear that it's not
going to go away anytime soon,
the issue, the Earth change,
it was a little
micro Earth change,
but it was emblematic of a
broader Earth change that
may come upon us at any time.
Community was the
thing that made it OK.
That everyone had
a skill to offer.
We generated our own comfort
and security and resources
together.
And it was a lovely
example to me
of thinking, that's the
thing that counts here,
that you have to
know the community.
You have to be involved in the
evolution of that community.
Or shut your mouth.
You can't just complain
on an internet forum
about how dreadful-- be
involved or shut your mouth.
>>REGINA: So
culturally, that's how
we begin to transform and
regain our sovereignty.
>>KRAMER: You have to be up to
your neck in your own evolution
physically, in your actions
and deeds, in the place
that you're at.
Sometimes it's not
necessarily your street,
but the community might
be a community center,
it might be a
conference you do, it
might be a men's or
women's or spiritual group.
It could be all kinds.
It could be a fishing club.
It could be anything.
It could be a knitting club.
You know?
It doesn't matter what
it is, but to introduce
these ideas and
the opportunities
together gives an
incredible sense
of camaraderie and
comradeship and fellowship.
And in times of change,
they're very important.
But they also begin to
model something vital, which
is people begin to realize
that you don't need
the authorities for education,
for legal protection,
for enforcement of
common sense laws,
for medicine, for
wisdom, for religion.
You don't need establishments
and institutions for those.
When you have a wise community
with a solid character,
you can begin to provide
those things for yourself.
Another excellent thing
I learned last week,
lots of women who home
school and unschool--
the definition of
unschooling is,
everything you did before you
went to school and everything
you did after you
went to school, right?
All the learning.
So all my learning
was outside of school.
So I am an unschooler
in my very nature.
Those women are now
getting together
and realizing that their
education wisdom that they
can share with these young
people, their children
and others, surpasses
in quality what
happens in the most
expensive schools in America.
And they can deliver
a quality of education
and a socializing grace
to their children,
where they're studying
mathematics and English,
language, history, biology,
all those wonderful things.
But they're also going playing
at hockey, they're dancing,
they're playing baseball.
They're with their friends.
They do acting.
So their social skills are also
developing at a higher rate.
And it's producing
real human beings.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>KRAMER: Not
subjects of empire.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
I was going to get to that in
a little bit, the whole notion
of regaining sovereignty
and radically revising
the educational system.
OK.
So these mothers have
gotten together to do that.
I mean, is there an
answer that maybe
is more broad
sweeping than that?
In your opinion, if you're
now modeling the path
to sovereignty and its interface
with the existing education
system?
>>KRAMER: You have to begin
to generate your own resources
and materials and focus.
Whatever it is.
Whether it's education,
whether it's power, whatever.
So a group of people can get
together and buy solar power
and stop relying on the
utilities by 30%, and then 50%,
and then 70%, and then maybe,
in the future, altogether.
People can start to
edge away from a system,
rather than just cut it off.
And as we said previously,
to just go and live
in a cabin with some
beans and a shotgun,
that's not going
to suit everybody.
And if you've only woken up
halfway through your process,
which most people have, you've
already got a lot of things
to contend with.
So you have to make some
conscious decisions that
suit your family.
If your daughter wants
to-- as my niece wants
to be in medicine, she's
at a good university
studying medicine.
That's what she's chosen to do.
She also realizes
that she's interfacing
with the system for
certain purposes.
But that may give her the
springboard, for example,
to later change the way
she practices medicine
and bring in more holistic
and wise and spiritual aspect
to it.
So you can't prescribe a
way forward for people.
>>REGINA: I'm speaking more
of the younger years, where
it's total indoctrination and
memorization for the most part.
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
If I was-- I don't
have any children.
I would never send my
kids to-- in England,
we have primary school, high
school, college and university.
I would never send my kids
to any of those things
unless they expressed a
strong desire to do it.
Then I'd listen and
we'd talk about it.
But I would never do
that, because they're not
being educated.
They're being given a series
of vocational instructions
for employment.
They're being programmed
for employment,
and they're being programmed
to accept a series of norms,
that between 7 and 14, and then
14 and 21, those critical seven
year cycles, the brain soaks
up stuff and then closes.
And typically, at
21 it's closed.
It's finished.
Right?
You can open that up again
with your psychic can opener
and get going.
But for many people, it
finishes at that point.
So if you can have a child
from 17 to 21, you've got it,
they are robots.
They're going to go out
and follow a program.
They're not going to do anything
outside of that program.
Every hand movement,
every gesture,
every dream that they
have, is all programmed.
There isn't a single
free will exercise
in an asleep human being.
It's all symptomatic
and end process material
from a series of
instructions given
to them between the
ages of 7 and 14.
Prior to that, there's
a lot of leeway.
But 7 to 14,
something is happening
in a young person,
where you need
a great diversity of
import from wise elders.
We'll use that phrase once more.
And when I was at
high school, there
were no wise elders
in my high school.
Not a single one,
I'm sad to say.
When I went to art
college, we were lucky.
We had two excellent-- a man
and a lady, who were awesome
and were wise elders, and
showed us the relationship--
this is going to be a nice
segue into philosophy and music
and art in education.
How critically
important they were.
And they were passionate,
passionate people.
And I share that passion.
And sometimes, when I get a
bit worked up, or sad or angry,
I do it gleefully.
Because I remember when they did
it for me, what an impression
it made.
I thought, they really
care about this.
And she said, art
is not a play thing.
Art is the expression
of your soul.
And through the manifestation
of that art, whether it's music
or whether it is literature
or whether it's painting,
or whatever, you learn
something critical
about the human condition.
To take that out of
education, you might as well
stop reading and writing.
It's the same thing.
>>REGINA: I couldn't agree
more, because when you're
talking about art,
you're talking
about engaging the human
facility for creativity.
>>KRAMER: Right.
Primal force.
>>REGINA: And once that's
engaged and awakened again,
if it's been put to sleep
for whatever reason,
it can be applied
to anything else,
including restructuring
of all the other systems.
And so to have
creative individuals
is not part of the
game plan at large,
as far as I'm witnessing.
>>KRAMER: Creativity, largely
speaking, with refinement,
leads to freedom and power.
If it's left unwieldy,
it just leads
to a kind of bohemian
self-destruction.
Which can be very lovely
and gratifying and tempting
at times, to be honest,
but not very helpful.
The four primal forces
in a human being for me
are creation, destruction,
solidity, and yielding.
And any child's education has
to show the delicate and sublime
interplay between those factors.
That's absent.
There's no talk
of that in school.
When I was in high school in
a nice rural part of Northwest
England called Cheshire,
it's a very nice high school.
Still very-- it was kind of
like Harry Potter looking.
It was a beautiful old
building, very ancient.
I think it was established
in the 16th century.
An old school, right?
With certain principles and
certain ethics about education.
And it was still poor.
Very, very poor.
And I look back on
it now and think
about the crime of
time that was wasted.
And I look at the young
people now, and some of them
are excellent.
There is always that.
There's always that.
>>REGINA: Their spirit's broken.
>>KRAMER: But the
principle of education
was dispensed with, as
far as I can discover,
in about the 1920s after
the first World War.
People gave up on it.
And it was no longer
considered an elementary part
of a human being's education
to have a classical education
and a love of knowledge,
which is wisdom.
OK?
So that whole thing of
being a philosopher.
You know, "philo"
is-- the word "philo"
and the word "sophia"
is to love knowledge.
Philo sophia.
A philosopher is
somebody who realizes
that knowledge and
wisdom are experiential.
You don't just do it in a book
in a little room with a tweed
waistcoat on.
You do it in life.
You do it with your children
when they're on your knee,
puking up over the
back your shoulder.
You do it when
somebody's laid dead
in a coffin in
front of your face.
You do in an airplane.
You do it in the cafe,
putting sugar in your coffee.
You know, wisdom
permeates everything.
And you're supposed
to be activating
that in young people.
And there's no mention of it.
None at all.
The word philosophy
was probably not
mentioned in all the years that
I was at this good high school.
Not at all.
I fell over it backwards in
the dark one day, and thought,
this is an essential
part of human life.
And in my formative education,
nobody mentioned it.
That's interesting.
>>REGINA: And you
went to a good school.
>>KRAMER: And I went
to a good school.
Crumbs, heavens above, whatever.
Who knows what's happening?
Who knows what's happening
in the inner city
rough schools where there's
these terrible segregated
racial people with
different kind
of terrible
underprivileged conditions,
whether they're
black, white, you
know, yellow, red,
purple, green, who knows.
>>REGINA: Everyone trying
to just survive the day.
>>KRAMER: But everyone's
trying to survive.
And a good day in
those schools is
to come home with no blood
hanging out of your nose.
What's happening there
with those people
is they're getting
completely conditioned
to regard themselves
as subjects.
It's not just a
lack of education.
It's to say, you are nothing.
Unless you go out and take,
you will have nothing.
Which is a very negative and
harmful message, in my view.
You create what you need.
You don't take it.
You create it.
So they have a fabricated,
manipulated view
of their own self-worth, which
basically, their self-esteem is
just trickled down the toilet.
There's none left.
And that creates resentment
and embitterment, and violence.
And that violence in England
and Sweden in particular,
two places I care a
lot about, is just
teetering on the
edge of disaster.
>>REGINA: Oh, it's horrible.
Yes.
I mean, so different
than 40 years ago.
>>KRAMER: And that's
nothing to do with race.
It always shows itself in race.
But it's not.
It's to do with a very
carefully, meticulously
engineered program of
de-education of human beings
which will take
out the people who
they press the button on first.
And it's just a terrible example
of unprincipled, irresponsible
migration into
Britain from countries
who have absolutely
no interest whatsoever
in being part of wonderful,
rich, beautiful, English
culture.
They come for the money.
And that's all
they're coming for.
And the health care.
And that's all.
And that is a
recipe for disaster.
And it's been going
on for 60 years now.
And it's just getting
to the point where,
for the very, very
first time-- this
is another show for another
time-- people are saying,
we don't want to
do that anymore.
We like it the way it is.
And that is an illegal
thought in England.
>>REGINA: I know it is.
It's just shocking
what's happened.
But we all have the right to
endorse the things that we
believe in, the things that
we love, whatever that may be.
But now it's viewed I think--
>>KRAMER: You do.
You do with your Constitution.
That right does not
exist in England.
It's a human concept and it's
a human impulse, for sure.
But law is against
that in England.
>>REGINA: Which is so weird.
Because conversely, you
know, flag waving, you know,
Kate's having another baby.
God save the queen.
I mean, to be British--
>>KRAMER: Good luck, Kate.
>>REGINA: --to be British,
it's in the media,
is constantly perpetuating
the notion of being British.
It's a flag waving, in
that sense, country,
yet you can't actually express
your-- what you just said.
You can't express
your appreciation
for a way of life that once was.
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
I went to my very first 4th
of July barbecue this year.
And the people I was with
were excellent and lovely.
And they were patriotic in an
intelligent and broad and human
way.
And they were like,
we like our community.
God bless America.
Let's have some sausages.
Right?
And that was really
what was going on.
>>REGINA: I think
it was hot dogs.
>>KRAMER: Hot dogs.
Beg your pardon.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: That's
British, sausages.
>>KRAMER: Sausages, yeah.
Nobody says that, do they?
During that time, I saw all
these flags out, of course.
And I know what the
people are thinking,
which is, we like
our way of life.
We do have certain
freedoms here that
appear to be
disappearing elsewhere.
We like the way we do things.
And the principle
of what's happening
in America in its pure
state is quite good.
And I would agree with that.
However, if they knew what
that flag actually represented,
they would set it on fire.
Because the flag is not
what they think it is.
And that's the great
dilemma that we
talked about last time,
the invisibility of empire.
To wave a stars and
stripes or a Union flag
is a very unusual thing to
do because it is emblazoned
with these symbols
of subjecting oneself
to control, outside control.
And when you raise
that flag, you're
not saying I like my community
and my kindred spirits;
you are giving your power away.
And so that's part
of the challenge.
Because some of those people
are good men, good women.
They're like good
old boys or whatever.
And if your house was burning
down, they'd drag you out,
and the dog as well.
And they're solid, salt
of the earth people.
They don't understand.
They have no notion
at all of it.
And when they hear somebody
like me say, don't waive a flag
and don't vote, they
think it's 1960 again.
>>REGINA: That's where
we're going next.
OK, voting.
So sovereignty and
the reformation
of political systems.
>>KRAMER: Discuss.
Yeah.
Political systems,
again, my benchmark
is when I look at
the body politic
in England, in the
United Kingdom,
in Britain, however you
want to describe it,
I don't see any wisdom.
There was wisdom in the
'50s and '60s a little bit,
from what I can
gather from history.
And my father assures
me that in the '70s
there were the last vestiges
of wisdom in politics.
When I started to open my eyes
as a young man in the '80s,
I saw no wisdom.
None at all.
So I can't understand
how you can
have a system of people
with no wisdom determining
the administration of
a country and the laws
that govern that
behavior in that country.
It doesn't make any sense to me.
For that reason, I refuse to
give my consent to that system.
So I refuse to give it
my philosophical energy,
and I refuse to give it my vote.
Because the vote
is the primary way
of giving consent to a system.
What I do vote for
is local events
that affect the community.
And if, like, a guy
is going to do this,
and he does a great
job, he'll get my vote
in simple human terms.
If this guy comes in and
he's just a son of a gun,
and I know it's not--
he won't get my vote.
And that's what voting is.
That's what it's
supposed to be, right?
You vote for somebody who
you feel can do the job.
>>REGINA: Rather
than the illusion
of which is the better
candidate for president.
>>KRAMER: And is a true
representative of it.
But using the system
where you have
these different groups
and the houses and schools
and all these different colleges
and the electoral-- that
does not represent society.
And when I see-- whether
it's Bill Clinton or George
Bush or Barack Obama,
there's really, to me,
not a great deal of difference.
And I would even go
so far as to say--
I might regret this one day--
the Obama administration is one
of the most draconian I've
ever seen in the Western world.
And I say that primarily because
of his apparent willingness
to follow instructions.
It's not him, the man.
I don't know him, the man.
He might be a nice bloke.
I'm on about him in his office,
in his post as a servant.
As the ultimate servant
of a country, right?
>>REGINA: But he's not
serving the country
rather than whoever's
requesting of him.
>>KRAMER: He's
serving someone else
and what they're requesting
of him is to say,
you must take that
Constitution apart.
Where it's viewed not
as something to uphold.
Imperfect, but good.
But a historical, eccentric
curiosity that we can just go,
well, this is just
a lot of rubbish.
>>REGINA: And you know,
sometimes is takes someone
from the outside,
such as yourself,
to point that out
to the rest of us.
>>KRAMER: That
Constitution, your First
and Second Amendments
are the only things
you need to worry about.
Yes, the Fifth.
Yes, the 16th.
All these different things.
Your First and Second
Amendments are absolutely gold.
They should be protected.
In a great, wonderful,
enlightened society,
you don't need to
protect free speech.
You don't need firearms.
You can dispense--
they're silly, right?
I get that.
But in a state of empire,
you need those two things.
You need the ability to
defend your gift of life
and to be able to speak
about your gift of life.
And those, that's all it is.
And whether you
choose personally
to speak or to defend yourself
is your private business.
But to have that enshrined on
a piece of paper that carries
weight is priceless.
>>REGINA: And it takes,
maybe sometimes, as I said,
an outsider.
In this case, a Brit, to tell
us how privileged we still are.
>>KRAMER: You are very
privileged in this country.
>>REGINA: But we
must protect it.
>>KRAMER: And you must see
that freedom and that privilege
as a great responsibility
to do something with it.
Not just to sit back and
think, aren't we great?
Because there are powers that
are trying to erode that.
In England, there is
no freedom of speech.
In England, there is no
ability for the citizens
to defend themselves.
That's gone.
That doesn't exist anymore.
You cannot get on the radio
and say whatever you like.
You cannot do that.
You cannot defend your
family, should you need to.
You cannot do that.
>>REGINA: There have been some
catastrophic repercussions
as a result of that.
>>KRAMER: You can't do it.
If you get caught with
certain words coming out
of your mouth or certain
objects in your pocket,
you go to prison, and
that's the end of it.
So that is a
draconian system that
has crept up on my fellow
British citizens and companions
and friends over
the last 60 years.
>>REGINA: Now, let's talk
about the effect of empire
on spirituality,
but also taking back
that essential refinement
in our own lives.
>>KRAMER: If you consider
yourself your own authority,
lots of things fall into place.
If you ever bow down to
authority, lots of things
begin to drift.
A good test is that if a
policeman knocks on your door,
how do you feel?
Most people go-- ooh.
Oh gosh.
Something's wrong.
What is it?
Hello?
What-- is somebody dead?
Have I done-- ah!
>>REGINA: I-- I feel quite
differently about that.
>>KRAMER: I know you do.
If a policeman knocks on your
door, how do you feel, right?
That's a good
benchmark for this.
>>REGINA: Indignant.
What are you doing
here on my property?
>>KRAMER: So that
is a lovely test.
Because prior generations,
my parents and grandparents
and great grandparents'
generation, those authority
figures, you just did
what you were told.
So this movement
of empire, let's
just acknowledge for
a minute, that it's
brought a great teaching to us.
Which is, hang on a second.
No, you don't do
what you're told.
You shouldn't do that.
And just because they've
got a badge and a uniform
doesn't mean that you
should do what you're told.
Right?
Now, that in England
was unthinkable
in the 1920s and '30s
and '40s and '50s.
You did what you were
told because there
was the conception,
which is a misconception,
there was the idea that
the government is good,
they're voted in by
the people, and they're
doing a very, very good job.
They're doing the
best they can in very
difficult circumstances.
We know now that
that's not true.
And it has never been true.
In all of ancient history,
going back as far as you
can, 8,000 years.
It gets hazy prior to that.
So certainly, in
the last 2000 years,
where we have a decent
record of history in Britain,
I can't see any examples of
wise, equitable management
of people through a
freely elected government.
Not a single example of it.
Therefore, some of
those rules change.
OK?
So you do get conscious,
excellent, community policing
to make sure that when there's
a problem it's dealt with.
But they're not enforcing
things necessarily.
Because the community
doesn't require it.
There's a completely
different thing, though,
where those guys are
being militarized.
>>REGINA: Yes, they are.
>>KRAMER: And we've seen
that with many recent events.
>>REGINA: All over
Europe, America, yes.
>>KRAMER: All over Europe
that's already happened.
>>REGINA: It's very sad.
>>KRAMER: You're getting a
taste of it now, in Ferguson
and places like that.
That's-- we've seen that
for a long, long time.
We've seen people get
batonned and crushed.
>>REGINA: And that is
a frightening image.
>>KRAMER: It is a
frightening image.
And it says to
people, there really
isn't a separation between
the military and the local law
enforcement.
There really isn't a separation.
We sometimes look exactly the
same, and we'll all shoot you.
And we'll all
ultimately take an oath
that is against human nature.
There is other
great men and women
who work in law enforcement and
military and medicine and fire
who do not agree with that
and have a very different view
of that oath and are actually
trying to serve the community
and all that kind of stuff.
But that's a separate movement.
So within what we're
talking about today,
you have to begin
to detach the two.
To say perhaps we don't need
anybody to tell us what to do.
And perhaps if we structure
our community in such a way,
that won't bother
the authorities.
Because you say, well, I
don't know what they're doing.
But we have no claim
on what they're doing,
because that land is their land.
They own it.
There's no zoning laws
to it, because it's
a Native American
tribal community
that they have a pact
with, which then puts it
outside of our-- they have
no business, literally,
to walk through your front gate.
You don't have any address.
An address is a contract.
You don't have an address.
You don't have a name.
There's no need
for you to pay tax
if you're not in the
system, because you're not
taking part in it.
>>REGINA: And we
addressed this quite a bit
in the first conversation, which
is a serious choice to make.
I mean, there are-- right now--
>>KRAMER: You don't
do it lightly,
or you could end up in prison.
>>REGINA: You don't
do it lightly.
And again, for anyone who hasn't
already seen the first part,
I think they need to look at the
first part of the conversation.
>>KRAMER: They need to
take a look at it, yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now, there's another area I
think we can just brush on,
because it's so massive that it
really should be-- maybe done
in entire length format
one time, between us.
But let's talk a little
bit about the reformation
of economics.
Because this is huge.
It affects everyone.
It's a massive subject.
Maybe just give us
a thumbnail sketch
before we move on
to our final point.
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
The simple fact is we should
never be using money, period.
It disconnects human
beings from growth.
So every time we lay
our hands upon it,
it puts us in a
compromised position.
However, as we all do, we
wake up during the process,
not at the beginning
of it or the end of it,
but somewhere in the middle.
And the process is, we use
these little bits of paper
and these pixels on a screen
to denominate and classify
different levels of
access to resources.
OK?
That's what money is.
It's the ultimate tool to
keep people doing something
that is lacking in authenticity.
They do things because,
well, I need the money.
I'm doing it for
the money, right?
I know I shouldn't be doing
this, but we need the money.
I know I shouldn't be
buying this chicken that's
been pumped with
antibiotics, but it's cheap.
And I only have a
little bit of money,
and I've got three kids to feed.
So money is a way of
keeping that paradigm going
for longer and
longer and longer.
And the way you
move away from it
is, first of all, to use your
money only locally, right?
So as far as possible,
use cash locally.
As far as possible,
use a credit union.
Don't bank with a big bank.
When you give your
money to a big bank,
you're giving them money to
kill brown people faraway
in distant lands.
That's what they do, all
of them, with that money.
A credit union doesn't do that.
They use the money locally in
a more conscientious, human,
and peaceful way.
So the first thing, you
could be radical and say,
let's not do that.
Let's do town banking.
Let's do bartering.
Let's move away from the
system completely and buy
this piece of land somewhere
and not-- you could do that.
>>REGINA: And maybe
it needs to be
a hybridized version
of all of it.
>>KRAMER: And I've been to
communities that do that.
Some of them work well, some
of them do not work well.
I've also seen places
that declare themselves
as a sovereign principality,
or whatever you call it.
A sovereign state,
completely separate,
with different laws and
different expectations.
And I've seen that in
Montreal, that was.
That was interesting.
But it has its challenges.
For me personally, and for
probably most of your audience,
I would say, begin to
take the money away
from the people who are using
it in a destructive sense.
Right?
Draw it back to you, personally.
And draw it back out of
that system as best you can.
Then, when you do things locally
and with friends and family
and community and colleagues and
associates and acquaintances,
try not to use money.
Try not to have that involved.
Exchange skills and
knowledge instead.
That's what I try and do.
So rather than someone saying,
I'll do that for $20, yeah, no.
It does not require money.
I'll fix your computer
that you've got a virus
and all your files are messed
up, I'll fix that for you.
And you know what?
I'm not very good at
putting shelves up.
Maybe you could help me.
I'll do that.
I love wood work.
>>REGINA: No, and it's so much
more personal and rewarding.
>>KRAMER: And it's
simple to do that.
And the other thing is to
consider the system of exchange
is based upon a conscious
decision to disempower.
So you have to realize that
you are still taking part
in a process of disempowerment.
That is our consent every
time we use that dollar bill,
that pound note, we are
consenting to empire.
You have to realize
that you are, however
conscious, going to Whole
Foods and buying your bloody,
you know, organic kale things.
Crisps, what are crisps?
Say, your chips.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
we have those too.
>>KRAMER: That's
nice, that's OK.
But ultimately, every
time you use that thing,
you're doing something
weird with it.
It's interesting to see
what Bitcoin is doing.
These cryptocurrencies.
Many countries are
scared to death of it.
Some of the smarter ones
are saying, well, OK.
We'll control how
that works, and we'll
crush it and float it and
expand it and diminish
it as necessary.
That's interesting, though.
Bitcoin is an interesting
thing to take a look at.
It's very easy, in my opinion,
to sequester it and take over.
But at the moment, it is
quite wild west and free,
which I think is
really interesting.
So I would encourage people to--
>>REGINA: Look into it.
Study Bitcoin.
>>KRAMER: Look into
Bitcoin and look
into its foundation,
its principle.
Understand what
a block chain is.
Understand how
its representation
has no, by design, relationship
to any material wealth.
It's just a system of exchange.
It's not promising anything.
There's no gold
necessary for this.
It's just a system of
theoretical exchange, which
is the first time I
think that's happened.
I don't think we've seen
that in modern history.
So that's interesting.
For me, the starting
point is to consider
what you do with your money
in terms of not having
it safeguarded by banks who
use it for other things.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And we can all make that choice.
We can all make that choice.
>>KRAMER: That's
really important.
It's not that difficult.
>>REGINA: Even if
it's that simple,
and that's the only thing
we do, that's a big choice.
>>KRAMER: If you bank with
a big bank, every time
you get your wallet
out and you see
that card in there, that card
is a consent to destruction
in foreign lands.
Put that card away,
go find another one,
and then when you've
shifted your resources over,
then you can destroy that.
Make that simple step now.
It makes a huge difference.
>>REGINA: Yes.
It makes a lot of sense.
>>KRAMER: Massive.
>>REGINA: Massive.
And it also helps to
ultimately take the power away
and dissipate the power
completely of those banking
structures.
>>KRAMER: It does.
It makes life difficult.
It makes life very difficult.
>>REGINA: I have one
question left for you,
because we're
almost out of time.
And that has to do more
with a living philosophy
that I know you're
really big on.
And that is, will you
explain to us the beauty,
and really the
necessity if we're
to take back our
own sovereignty,
in becoming lifelong students.
Renaissance people.
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
When you're involved in
spiritual development,
you become involved in also
didacticism, which is just
simply a posh word
for teaching yourself
through the course of your life
about the nature of reality.
So the auto didactic impulse
is something very precious,
which is that you can teach
yourself better than anybody.
And when you need
specialist knowledge,
you might go and get that.
The idea of the Renaissance
man, the Renaissance woman,
the polymath, is
to say that wisdom
is hidden all over
different territories, all
over different landscapes.
And you have to
become proficient
in many, many things.
And it's-- the joy of it is
that it's pleasurable to learn.
And you realize that rather
than it being something
that is aimed towards
you getting a job,
drawing a paycheck,
it's actually
for the pleasure and the
insight that it gives you
with regard to
understanding yourself
and your relationship
with reality.
So as people engage
with that, they
come to understand that learning
is spiritual development.
It's treating yourself,
self, S-E-L-F, self,
as the instrument
for your own growth.
Not as something on a page.
But you become the marker for
your own spiritual engagement
with life.
And that comes
automatically when
you put learning number
one in your daily life.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I mean, what else
is there to life
but to gain as much
experience as you can.
>>KRAMER: And in
your relationships,
and in your food, and in your
friendships, and in your home,
and in the decorations in
your home, and in the things
that you put in your mouth.
Bring that learning and
that wisdom into every area.
And soak it up.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Neil, it's been a
pleasure sitting with you
the last couple of
hours, as always.
And of course, we're
going to do this again.
>>KRAMER: Thank you.
It's been a pleasure.
>>REGINA: So thank you so much.
You're such a clear thinker.
So articulate.
And I know our viewers have
very much been enjoying you.
As Neil's explained
so well, if we
don't like the
illusion of empire,
we need to consciously
engage in our choices
and in our lives, as you
just said, in every way.
You can learn more about Neil
and his work at neilkramer.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]